[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well good evening everyone as
we begin this second episode of our
walkthrough here on the new series we
come across the subject of tonight's
study and that is why we study church
history it is quite a thing to express
that we study church history and try to
describe what it is what its boundaries
are its
parameters but when we really get down
to it I believe one of the reasons why
so few people spend their time setting
church history has to do with not
thinking that it in any way is
Meaningful and so I wanted to take at
the beginning of this new series an
episode to discuss why we study church
history church history is not something
that's just fascinating though it is
fascinating in and of itself it's not
just a story of history and uh Intrigue
and power and all the other things that
go on in church history it is not a way
simply to establish ones or to claim
legitimacy for your church or another
church or however the story goes um and
I hope you know me well enough to know
that uh that's not that's not how we
study church history at all uh no matter
if you think yourself part of a church
that's 2,000 years old there is no
visible uh church that has been without
change for 2,000 years it doesn't really
work like that um and we will see that
all through church history not not any
single organization has been consistent
throughout all these years so it it it
cannot be for the establishment of
oneself and that's one of the things I
really want to emphasize uh when it
comes to why I study church history
because there's a lot of people that
when they when they talk about the why
for it the uh the the purpose for
studying church history they get very
myopic they they they get very
nearsighted and look at how can it
benefit me how can it benefit my
organization or how can it benefit my
claims of theological Supremacy or
however the case may be um or rightness
or correctness or historicity or any of
these things that is not the reason why
you study church history if that is the
reason you study church history then
you're just going to end up with kind of
this wigg is view of things this
progressivist idea that uh it finally
has culminated in me lucky for all of
history to finally culminate in somebody
as awesome as myself and that would have
the exact opposite effect of what church
history is um as I argue church history
as I argued in the last episode church
history I teach as an extension of
Christian fellowship and if Christian
Fellowship is all about you then it's
being done
wrong and if if church history is as I
contest a an expression of Christian
Fellowship then one of the outcomes of
it ought to be humility one of the
outcomes of it ought to ought to be a
greater appreciation for the work of God
not just in your life but in other
people's lives as well it should grow
your faith it should be a source of
wisdom it should be all of these things
and so that really does uh emphasize for
us the why of studying church history
and there's a whole another
group of people who don't think church
history affects them and so they never
study it they probably uh do not
download podcasts on church history and
and sit and wonder about these things or
learn about them and they don't think it
affects them in any way so um before I
even get into the the uh culling in any
expectation that church history is about
us and how it can benefit us I do want
to at least address the reality that
church history does indeed affect
us this may seem strange at first to
look at and say why is why is this one
of the chief or one of the first uh
Prime ways that you talk about why we
study church history because if we're
ignorant of the fact that it has
affected us we will never understand
what forces have made us we will never
understand what forces have influenced
our thinking uh and what what uh
influences continue to affect us and
we've never even analyzed them or
considered them now some may say and I
know this this happens in conservative
Protestant circles and well I don't need
church history I have the Bible well
every time you open the Bible uh every
passage you tend to go towards or or
passages you tend to stay away from are
informed by the habits of other
Christians right um do a little bit of
thought experiment with me here for a
seconds how many of you and be honest
how many of you have opened the book of
nahem recently
right uh versus opening to something
like the Gospel of John for instance um
that reality that we all know is part of
our habit is not just owed to us we did
not selectively choose to emphasize
certain aspects of scripture that has
been informed by the habits of other
Christians I'm not saying it's bad I'm
just saying it's there and because it's
there it it bodess well for us to study
these things and to know what has
affected us directly why is it that when
I open up a certain passage in the book
of Galatians that somebody's words whose
name I probably don't know echoes in my
ears as far as my interpretation kind of
giving me boundaries for what I'm
allowed to see there or whatnot um why
for instance if I'm uh say if I'm
Catholic do I see uh the the belief of
purgatory in 1 Corinthians 3 or why if
for instance I see uh the uh um the
commands of of uh or the instruction of
Paul with regards to predestination is
uh someone like John Calvin sitting
right next to me in Romans 9 um these
types of influences are in our
backgrounds they are unavoidable it
already does affect us and so if we do
not study church history and this really
does get to the why as well if we do not
study church history then we are really
at the whim of being affected by those
that we have not vetted uh and we have
not gone back to actually consider is
this a person or is this a group or is
this a theological construct that I
would like to have affecting me in one
way or
another um as I come from a background
that does not uh Place its trust into a
singular organization I understand also
that there is those who listen to this
show that do you have uh a church that
you would hold to be an original church
or the original church or the only
church or however the case may be it's
going to be a little strange for you to
listen to this whole series um you're
certainly welcome to uh come alongside
would love to have you um but I'm not
going to teach in a way that says uh
that there's certain ones that are
endorsed that ought to inform you um
what I'm going to do is study this in a
way to help us see which ones have
affected us um now I am certainly going
to sprinkle my opinion throughout here
um I believe there's all manner of
wisdom to be garnered both from those
who are wise and those who are foolish
um those who are foolish usually it is
in the form of uh avoidance uh and those
who are wise uh through emulation and uh
it takes time sometimes and familiarity
to understand those so but I do not go
with a specific um organized church with
regards to who we pay attention to so we
try to pay attention to as many people
as we possibly can here and that's one
of the things that I want to have us be
able to
do not only does it affect you it
already has affected you even the way
you're listening to this show the reason
for why you ever clicked on a uh podcast
or a show called church history and
theology it means that church history
has already affected you one way or
another and some ways that's good in
some ways that's bad but in all ways it
is church history and this is how we try
to start to peel apart ways in which it
has affected us how it is uh how it has
influenced us um I do not hold for
instance that there is uh there is only
one specific history that we need to pay
attention to I want us to pay attention
to as broad a category of church history
as we can uh this doesn't mean everyone
that claims to be a Christian I'm going
to uh consider a Christian in fact quite
the opposite there's many groups that
consider themselves Christians that uh
are decidedly not um but I think you
will find I'm I'm quite broad with my
definition of who is a Christian um you
know while I am Reformed Baptist I do
also hold to reality that you do not
have to have perfect salvation or excuse
me perfect theology in order to have
salvation um none of us is perfect
Theology and so we can be wrong about
things and just because we are wrong
about things about God does not mean
that he cannot save us despite ourselves
um
so I I think you will find that I'm
actually quite broad when I come to my
definition of who is and who is not a
Christian now if they in their works
bear out a life not keeping with the
fruit of repentance well then we're
going to have a whole another discussion
if somebody is in unbroken um abuses of
office or of simony or of all of these
things you'll see how it goes um this
kind of stuff though has already
affected you right the way you listen to
me the way I speak the way that we talk
about these things uh evidences for the
fact that whatever church we are a part
of whatever uh background we have we are
already affected by church history
uh we are affected by it when we pick up
our scriptures not only in
interpretation but in how it's bound and
how it's typed uh and how it's laid out
and whether it has references and
whether it has study notes when uh all
manner of things come down to us all the
ways in which we talk about certain
aspects uh hardly able to have a
discussion on the Trinity without
referencing some of the language that
comes from different church councils
that is regardless of your opinion of
church councils
that is in the language you cannot
Escape it and so it will inform it uh
whether you like it or not it does not
matter it already has affected you and
the ways in which you practice uh your
uh expression of Christianity or your
Church's expression of Christianity uh
specific denomination however it goes
um and really it that pulls us into one
of the more uncomfortable aspects about
this that some people don't really like
and that is why we study church history
it really does show us why you believe
what you believe I know all of us thinks
that we are the special snowflake
sitting somewhere you know on a hill I
just have my Bible or I just have my
Saints or uh canon law or tradition or
um liturgy or whatever the case may be
and say I I do not have to be affected
by all these things here is my standard
yeah life's not that simple neither are
humans and certainly Christians aren't
when we when we look at all of these uh
aspects of church
history when we express certain things
that we believe when we say for instance
that you know Christians shouldn't drink
alcohol or um you know Christians should
this or Christians should that there is
there is a massive amount of History
that's sitting behind you uh that is
influencing you and again those
influences uh have come down to you in
your beliefs the these are not you just
walking up to the scriptures or God just
downloading his information to you and
you say well if I feel right about this
then everything's okay um that's not how
the Christian Life Works the Christian
Life was not meant to be singular it was
meant to be in concert with other
Christians um and I I personally believe
and I hinted at this last week or last
time um is I personally believe that God
has specifically designed his church to
live in the midst of multiple
denominations I do not believe that the
goal is for the church to all be United
here on Earth that has never been the
case I don't believe it ever will be the
case and it's not a goal of mine to make
it the case I don't think it should be
anyone's goal it doesn't mean that we
don't pray as Christ did in John 17 for
us to be one of one mind absolutely but
we are not all going to
agree we are not all going to come to
agreement on things we will differ on
things and I think that is just fine not
to say that we're subjectivists we're
not I am about as objective as it gets
about these things but I will say our
perspectives on these things as we see
are influenced by not only
scripture but by 2,000 years of history
of all manner of people that we both
reject and accept and which ones we love
which ones we prefer uh regardless of if
you are a part of a church that uh
declares certain things and says these
things are off limits those ones are not
and all of this stuff still you have
favorites you have influences that you
prefer and things that you emphasize and
I'm not I'm not overly individualizing
this I'm just simply saying it's going
to in the in the final analysis it is
going to affect you particularly and
what you believe especially when you
come down to what church you attend to
that may be as as recent in your
experience as where your parents went
and they are a part of church history as
well that has affected you it has
affected your beliefs the pastor you've
listened to or the priest you listened
to or um or the um uh or the way in
which you have uh come to the
conclusions you have all of these things
are an expression of church history and
this is one of the reasons why we study
it is because it has already affected
you it is in your belief system it is in
your experience and we pull it apart to
understand where it all came from and I
find that particularly helpful there's
two aspects though going forward that I
really want to talk about and with
regards to why we study church history
one of them is focused on God the other
one is focused on his people so let's
start with the most important and that
is
God when we talk about the history of
the
church we're addressing the reality that
long Focus helps determine God's actions
we've all been susceptible to
nearsightedness um we we may be a part
of a church that you know something
really nice happened that we really um
uh we really appreciated you know
favorable circumstances we paid off the
church's mortgage or something like this
and we will focus more on that and say
that that is a blessing of the Lord
certainly is there's all manner of
things that are blessings of the Lord
um and we will focus on that and and
I've seen this happen multiple times we
will assume that God
is more exclusively working in our lives
than in anybody else's lives because we
have a front row seat to it and this
does not help in humility um which we're
going to talk about next long Focus
helps pulls us pull us out of this it
has the same effect of traveling around
around the world and meeting Christians
that are not uh from your culture that
do not speak your language and to
realize that Christianity is a lot
bigger than you um and studying church
history helps us with that as well it
gives us a long Focus or a broader focus
and it helps determine where God is at
work everywhere in the world not just in
the places that we are when we get that
nearsighted we tend to forget that um
that God is at work in places is other
than us that God is at work with people
that differ than us um and this is
something that the modern era with all
of our ability of transportation and
communication has really opened up the
world um we are not only aware of but
we're able to communicate with uh
Christians of very different
denominations and in very different
cultures than we have ever gotten to do
at any other point in history now that
leads to a lot of clashes that leads to
a lot of disagreements um even some
ribbing but in the end we have to work
through this as part of our growing
pains because it is a long Focus that we
are aiming at here all of us I believe I
hope are sincere enough to say that we
are looking to understand where God is
at work in the world we may differ in
fact we certainly do differ on where
exactly we understand God to be at work
in the world but I would I would hope
that every Christian I run into whether
it be uh somebody from from the East
whether it be somebody from South Africa
whether it be somebody from uh Rome
whether it be somebody from Alabama or
New York or Washington State or Chile I
if I would if I would come across this
person I would hope that one of their
goals would be to determine where God is
at work in the world and their
interaction with you and your
interaction with them should help us
understand that when we go to and
extrapolate that to church history this
is what I'm talking about it's one of
the reasons why I want to study things
that I typically did not get to study
when I walk through church history my
first times and that is churches in the
East churches in Ethiopia um even some
of the Assyrian churches of the East and
now uh again I'm going to go into places
that some would consider off limits um I
don't consider that kind of stuff off
limits I don't even describe heresy
necessarily as wrong belief but really
more of wrong belief that leads to uh an
interruption of Salvation that that it
actually breaks up the preaching of the
Gospel in one way or another um
obviously something like you know Jesus
not being God directly would um affect
how the gospel functions uh and and
quite in a in a desperate way and so
that would be something that would I
would be considering off limits but when
we're talking about a difference of
whether uh this uh this church was in
League with uh the certain Patriarchs of
this or the Bishops of that that or the
pope of this those kind of things I'm
I'm almost always going to ignore um I
don't believe much has ever happened
good in church history through uh or
ever the perspective of what God was
doing exclusively through us simply
because somebody was paying attention to
what God was doing uh only with them and
then forgot that you know God is a
little bit bigger than just that um and
that goes to my next Point as well and
that is why do we study church history
it cultivates humility
only when it's done
right there's a lot of people that know
church history there's a lot of people
that know church history better than me
there's a lot of people that know church
history better than you but I will say
this if one of the goals of studying
church history is not to uh achieve some
level of humility about oneself and
one's
Church no matter how many facts about
church history you know no matter how
many things you can rattle off if it
does not result in humility you are
doing it
wrong you are a
Christian you are studying church
history an extension of Fellowship I
hope you are studying church history is
an extension of fellowship and the goal
of that one of the main goals of that
should be humility this is the
primary virtue of the Christian Life the
opposite of this is pride if you go into
studying church history you want to know
if you have your why Mex mixed up if you
go into studying church history and you
come out proud and just beaming with
pride you're doing it
wrong you should be doing this as a
Christian every part of the fruit of the
spirit should be at work in you when you
are studying church
history when we talk about the why of
these things humility has to be at one
of the tops of the
list when we learn about not only that
there are so many different theological
views but we also learn that maybe ours
isn't as original as we thought maybe
ours isn't as clear as we thought maybe
ours isn't as Apostolic as we thought
maybe our history doesn't go back to the
very beginning as we were taught maybe
some things happen in church history
that we don't know yet um perhaps
there's some things that have gone on
that we would absolutely cringe to
learn these types of things are reality
in church history in fact there is
nobody in the first century that looked
looks and talks and believes and thinks
exactly like anyone currently in the
world today there is no first century
Apostolic Church in the world today the
reason being is all the people that God
had to live in the first century
Apostolic Church are
dead okay today is the 21st century God
did not have you born at the wrong time
you are here on
purpose and you are listening to this on
purpose I I believe the Providence of
God to such a minute scale and one of
the reasons why we don't aim to go back
to the first century or we don't aim to
just emulate the first century is we're
not there we're here we have to be in
charge of carrying out the Christian
virtues in a 21st century context
wherever we are and the way we do that
is by cultivating humility Even in our
study of these past 20
centuries we don't look back to say well
here's how I'm right and you're wrong
there's a lot of places where we're
going to see that but here's the thing
everybody's wrong there is no church
organization that does not have its
hands all manner of dirty throughout
history because here's the thing they're
made up of
humans humans that still
sin humans that still have
problems and if we go into it going my
team is better than your team good study
it longer and you're going to find out
that both teams are worse than you
think always has been
and so when we come out of these things
we should not only be seeing it for its
value of what it is but in referencing
what God has been doing in the world it
should teach us a great deal of humility
that he actually uses People Like Us who
are probably going to screw up the
church just as much as the people before
us
did but God is faithful and he
continually grows his church and by that
I mean the invisible church I do not
mean your church organization the
invisible church will ever be grown by
the father father and as the son
continually intercedes and as the spirit
continually indwells we will see the
work of God and it will make us
humble this goes into how we think about
our
churches I believe one of the most
helpful byproducts of studying church
history has been a complete and utter
overhaul in the way I've thought of
ecclesiology or the study of the church
it it is perhaps one of the hardest
things to Gris to
grasp that perhaps the way you think
about church or worship or the gathered
assembly um is
not perfect or original or Apostolic or
ideal or whatever the case may be and
many Church organizations lie to
themselves that theirs is Apostolic
theirs is orig
everyone has always done it this way had
somebody uh tell me that this week
actually that their church has uh it
carries on the exact tradition the way
that everyone has always done it ever
since the very beginning that's nonsense
there's no church that does it like that
everyone has had some level of
development everyone has had some level
of change everyone has had desires to
reform and attempts to reform and some
that get lacks in things some that that
try to preserve things some that try to
change things and then go back and you
have more Reformation movements there's
so many different changes that have
happened over the years that it is
nonsensical to say that my organization
is the original one there isn't doesn't
work like
that when we talk about ecclesiology and
the definition of the church or what it
is um I have come more and more of the
opinion the more I study church history
uh the deeper this gets is that there is
no organization worth putting any trust
in I don't mean you don't go to church
absolutely you you attend church I mean
your trust better be solely put in
Christ not in the church the church will
let you down I mean it doesn't matter
what denomination you're part of I don't
care how solid it is it's kind of one of
these things of this world turn the
clock forward a little bit of time and
you're going to find it disappointing
you um you know I and
again how how people think through these
things how they deal with these things
is different based on you know what you
what you think about the state of the
church and you may think this the same
as I thought in my late 20s when I uh
first became a pastor is that you know
if as long as I can make an ideal Church
everything should be fine it took me
several years to realize that there is
no such thing as an ideal church and
studying church history helped me see
that there never has been an ideal
Church the first century church was not
an ideal Church the second century
church was not an ideal Church never did
we quote unquote get it
right because again the church is never
here to fix the whole world it is not
here to inform all of the things that
are to go on it is here to be an
expression of the righteousness of God
in the midst of a crooked
world now we see the Kingdom of Heaven
breaking in as the scriptures say we are
receiving a kingom
it is something that is gradual it is
something that is breaking in it is
something that taking over the world and
it goes out into all the nations of the
world on the authority of Christ we
understand
this how exactly that looks many
Christians have seen in many different
ways it doesn't mean they're all equally
right or all equally wrong it just means
there's massive differences and yet
somehow in the midst of all of this
Insanity Christ is growing his church
and we may not always be able to see it
in fact I can assure you we won't but it
will at least appreciate in our minds
how God has been at work and that's one
of the things that I'm really quite
grateful for uh somebody asked me this
week actually with regards to uh my view
on uh communion or or Eucharist you know
um why do I see it why do I why would I
see it as a memorial meal for instance
as being a valid thing what's the point
of that and I said well well in in my
tradition in my habit and way of
thinking I look at it as as being born
out of
Passover as having the same role that
Passover had for the Israelite people um
I don't look at it as a a a place of
sacrifice or of mass or anything like
this I said I see memory as something
that solidifies in us when we remember
Christ as often as we eat and drink of
it and the question came back you know
what what's the role of solidified
memory I said well it teaches us to
trust God more it increases our faith we
realize his promises we realize his
faithfulness in the past and we realize
then his faithfulness in the
future and I say that church history has
a lot to do with this as well this is
part of the um it's about God and His
purposes in the
world one of the things that I did not
expect in studying church history
and this really speaks into the why we
do it is it does help temper our
extremities there is a habit in the
world there's a habit in the church to
lose
focus um to lose focus of how hard some
people have had life before and so we
imagine if our theology is expecting
that the world gets really bad and then
it ends
then when our little corner of the world
gets bad we expect the end of the world
to
come um but I believe that it is far
more complicated than this I believe
that there is much bigger story going on
than I think anyone imagines um there's
a lot of opinions in the area of
eschatology and last things and the
purpose of the church and the outcome of
it the end of the church the Eternal
State and all of
these you say why would that be related
to the study of church history it's
directly related to it
because some of the most extreme aspects
of expectations have almost always led
to people losing their
faith when it comes to people making
predictions about the end of the world
or when it comes to people saying I will
set up a city or I will set up a
citystate or I will set up a country or
a church state or a an amalgam of state
and church together that will bring
about
uh this almost perfect Utopia of church
on Earth or of Heaven on Earth through
the church it always
fails
always and so rather than us trying to
take the promises of God into our own
hands and bring them about it really
does in studying church history help
temper our extremities with this there's
a lot of people that have predicted that
Christ is coming back on this date or
that date or that date they're all wrong
every single one of
them they always have been they always
will be this is not something that we
are told to be able to do what we are
told to be able to do is to watch and
wait and to be patient and to endure our
trials in a manner that brings us the
joy of patience that patience may have
its complete and perfecting work and so
when I say one of the wise of studying
church history is it helps temp our
eschatology just read the word patience
in there it teaches us humility it
teaches us patience teaches us to wait
for God's timing for things rather than
to force the hand God has his purpose
right he gave the church for a reason he
gave the state for a reason he gave
these things not so that we can mix them
all together and make things happen he
gave them separately he gave them with
different intentions with different
goals with different
Ministries and when we get
impatient when we think that we can
hurry along the plan of God that's when
we make our massive errors and that is
one of the great warnings of church
history is to look into how people have
tried
to let's say hurry along the kingdom of
God and have stepped directly into
it so that really covers the why of
church history with regards to the focus
on god let's let's focus on people
right one of the great aspects of
studying church history is the learning
of faithfulness of people that have gone
before
us our brothers and sisters have
endured have written have lived and died
and carried on in ways that are
impressive and not just impressive but
faithful
they join the cloud of witnesses that
stands before us made up of the prophets
and the apostles and every single
Christian that came before us is part of
this cloud of witnesses of faith that we
emulate and in studying their stories in
studying the way that they talk about
their life the way that they see God
these things help us it is no different
than the Fellowship of the church that
you fellowship with on on a weekly basis
the stories of God's intervention in
their life their comfort in his promises
regardless of how the circumstances are
dire these types of
things excuse me these types of things
consistently speak to us of the clarity
of God's promises with regards to the
hopes he actually promises to us he
doesn't promise US simple lives or easy
lives he doesn't promise to to us lives
with no pain he actually promises us
quite the opposite actually and speaks
to us of his enduring presence in our
lives and his faithfulness and our
preservation it's kind of a remarkable
thing this is not to say that we study
church history for selfish reasons no um
we grow our faith not so that we can
hold it to ourselves no no more would we
hold our faith to ourselves than uh as
we are told in the um in The Sermon on
the Mount the light that God has put
within us uh we are to have shine out
into this world um our faith is not just
to be held to ourselves it is to
actually be lived out in the midst of
this world not so that people see our
good works and glorify us but no that
they see our good works and glorify our
father because they recognize where
these things come from where where
patience in tribulations come from
um where
peace true peace comes
from it's not just about those things it
is that we actually have generations of
Christians that come after us that we
need to live faithful examples for as
well and to pass down the gospel it
helps us instead
also to avoid the pitfalls this is
perhaps the one if you ever see somebody
post up or um talk about or give them
out message about why we study church
history this is the one that everyone
always focuses on um and I put it here
near towards the end because I don't
believe that it is one of the main
reasons I believe it's a minor reason
but it's a helpful one and certainly a
legitimate one U and that is Pitfall
avoidance um those who don't study
church history are are doomed to fall
into some of the traps that people in
church history have already fallen into
there really is nothing new Under the
Sun uh all of the failures we are seeing
today all of the capitulations we are
seeing today have happened before uh
they will happen again and uh that will
keep going and how we avoid such things
really has a lot to do with how we
approach church history uh and so one of
the reasons why we study it why we do
not want to make the mistakes of the
past we've already learned that that
doesn't work and just from a pragmatic
perspective I don't want to do stuff
that doesn't work I would rather do
things that work I would rather focus on
the nature of the world as it is uh
rather than I was I would prefer it to
be I don't want to interact with the
world with my uh Eyes Wide Shut I don't
want this this uh idea that everything
going on in the world is not uh really
going on the stuff that's going on we
have to interact with uh we can't just
interact with the world in a way that we
would prefer it to be
right because at the end of the
day as Christians we have a message that
transcends all of these things and one
of the great Pitfall avoidances that we
can say is that there is nothing that is
worth our actual Christian testimony I
would rather be uh a fool yet still
preaching the gospel I would rather uh a
church building not be beautiful as much
as I love gorgeous architecture I'd
rather something utilitarian rather than
nothing at all I would rather uh just a
a painted white wall rather than
distractions and people not actually
having faith in Christ uh whatever the
case may be call me pragmatic call me
low Church minded I I look I love Gothic
Cathedrals I love these types of things
but if if if that stuff distracts Us in
any way from Christ I will pull away
from it in a moment that includes
everything Flags statues icons I don't
care what it is if it distracts us from
Christ in any way or it in or it or it
provides a fertile
uh situation for some people for
idolatry or whatnot then I will
immediately rid myself of it uh those
types of things are not worth it and
that's one of the great pitfalls that
church history always sees repeated is a
return to such things uh and so that's
one of the great reasons to study church
history it is uh one of the minor ones
but it's a good one anyway and that is
to avoid such
things and this brings me to one of my
final points points and that is the
grounding of Christian
identity when we
see our brothers and sisters in
Generations gone by being faithful to
the Lord no matter how they were
challenged when we
see truth triumph over
lies we are encouraged we see our
siblings doing what they were meant to
do as God continually grows his people
up we see faithfulness when it shines
through we do now there's going to be
some times as we go through church
history that we're going to see
Christians going up against
Christians or people calling themselves
Christians going up up against people
calling themselves Christians and you
may not agree with what side I take on
these things that's
okay um when it when it comes down to it
you're going to understand why I choose
certain sides there's times where
there's no Christians on any sides
there's times where there's legitimate
Christians on both sides of the issues
and they are going to war against one
another and these are lamentable things
these are frustrating things but they
are part of the Christian
identity and I think it's one of the
things that really helps us from taking
too hard of a stance and too
militaristic a stance on any one
particular thing because it tends to
drive us to the extremities uh and the
extreme reactions of things that in the
end and there's there are important
things sure but in the end who we are as
Christians really is far more important
than exactly how it is all of our
history has
occurred when we look into church
history this this really is born out of
an understanding that we cannot analyze
every Christian that has been we can
only see what we can
see I believe personally the most
influential Christians in all of history
are people whose names we do not
know I
believe we will be utterly
surprised to find out who the most
influential people in church history
were because it is not people like
Augustine as influential as he is and as
awesome as his writing is it's not
people like
Luther right it's not people like
Constantine I believe God works in ways
that are mysterious and that are beyond
our purview and while we can pay
attention to the things that are
revealed to us while we can pay
attention to the things that we know and
can come to a full attention of we
cannot
appreciate exactly yet those things that
we have not
seen and exactly who has affected what
in church history through prayer through
Miracle through in
intercession I don't believe we will
ever know this side of
heaven and so there's a great deal of
humility that comes even in the own
study of church history um we don't know
everything we know actually quite very
little
about history most of the time we only
know those things that we prefer to know
um you know we we know those quotes of
the church fathers that we like or we
know uh those certain theologians in
history that we like the ones that we
agree with the ones that we like
uh the ones that back us up but one of
the things I want to say here before we
even get be before we even begin into
the history of the church and and
opening up the study of uh of church
history total I want to get us into this
mode to think about the expansion of
Christian identity in our
minds how is it we see the value of
these things far far
broader than we have before and if
there's anything that I can encourage
you in it would be that I want you to be
able to appreciate the scope of church
history being far beyond anything you
expect so why I study church history we
study church history because it is our
family's history these are our brothers
and
sisters and our father is the god who is
driving all of this to its sure end and
may God make us patient until that end
that that is really what I hope to
do when we continue through this next
time we're together we're going to be
talking a little bit more about the
theological concept of the Church of
Christ as its
head the fountain from which all of
these things flow from where all of its
direction is taken and he has come to
this earth to find his bride and find
her he has and he is saving her and
perfecting her and one day we will all
be at the marriage supper of the Lamb I
will say this at the front end of this
you may agree with me you may disagree
with me I really don't I I don't lose
any sleep over these things but I will
say
this let's walk through this together
let's try to find a way to expand our
understanding of how the church
functions and how it works so that we
can actually appreciate one another
rather than just fighting constantly
because all of the fights in church
history have not really amounted to much
um I believe that the denominations are
intentional I believe that they are good
I believe they're healthy but only if we
conduct one with Excuse me only if we
conduct ourselves amongst each other
with humility that is present in the
Christian virtues and so I'm going to
commit to that I'm going to have you
hold me to it as I go forward there are
some things that as we come across they
are going to make me upset there are
some things that are going to make you
upset that's fine these are real things
people in families get upset at one
another that's that is okay uh I'm not
here saying oh everybody's a Christian
everywhere no I'm saying I can't make
the call on people's hearts but what I
can do is see if whether or not it's
consistent with Christian
witness is it consistent with how
scripture describes these things is it
is it sufficiently expressed to us that
we can know these things I want us to be
able to emphasize those things that are
uh of necessity to help us understand
church history that we may be able to
appreciate it from a much better vantage
point I think than before if you want to
join me in that we're on that path let's
work towards it uh and let's grow with
one
another let's Fellowship in church
history that's what I really hope
for well until next time um I am very
grateful that you're on this journey
with me and I'm looking forward to it uh
just the same as it is before in a
couple weeks we will be discussing
saying Christ is head of the church
invisible and throughout all of time and
how exactly that works more theological
in clesi ecclesiology so looking forward
to that until then may God bless you all
Lord's blessings
[Music]